chromebook guide (#234)
hexdump0815/imagebuilder: doc/chromebooks/setting_gbb_flags.md

# Why?

![screw](./assets/wp-screw/lenovo10e.jpg)

setting gbb flags will keep your device in developer mode with option to boot from usb at any time even if your battery ryns dry

these flags are usually protected by hardware write protection so you will need to disable it first

**But before**

in order to set gbb flags you need to [enable developer mode](./preparing-chromebook.md) on your device

# Disabling hardware write protection

hardware write protection can be dissabled in a few ways

> ## Removing a screw or shorting a circut (older chromebooks)

Reviewer: this maybe makes more clear that this is the way to go for older chromebooks
```suggestion
## Removing a screw or shorting a circut (required for older chromebooks)
```

Author: maybe "only older chromebooks" instead, the guide alrea says that disabled wp is required to proceed and never chromebooks don't have this

Reviewer: lets keep it as you had it then - fine with me as well

_Warning. opening your chromebook will likely void your warranty and may result in your device being bricked even if you think you know what you are doing_

_Note. this might not work on all chromebooks, for example [ideapad duet](https://github.com/hexdump0815/imagebuilder/issues/53#issuecomment-2197343028)_

1. this option like the one above requires you to open up your device
2. disconnect the battery from the mainboard and connect
3. connect the device to a charger 
_Note. there are minimal voltage requirements for device to turn on, you device doesn't turn on, it's likely your power source is too weak_
4. turn on your device

as long as the battery is disconnected the write protection should be dissabled on most devices

## Using suzyqable (recommended, modern chromebooks)

in order to perform this you will need suzyqcable to, buy or make one

- https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromiumos/third_party/hdctools/+/HEAD/docs/ccd.md#making-your-own-suzyq
- https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WGsyXlgSxFk

enter tty and check if CCD (Closed Case Debugging) is opened
```
gsctool -a -I
```

if it is opened you can skip opening it

but if it isn't run
```
gsctool -a -o
```

> _Note. it will require you to press PP button (a fancy word for power button) a few times, if you screen turns off after pressing that button just press it twice in a row quicklu_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Note. it will require you to press PP button (a fancy word for "person presence" button which usually is the power button of the device) shortly (to not power off the device) a few times, if you screen turns off after pressing that button just press it twice in a row quicklu_
```

after last press the device will shutdonw and you will have to enable developer mode again

now running
```
gsctool -a -I
```
should show that ccd is open

now plugin suzyqcable to you chromebook

> _Note. it will on work plugged into one of chromebooks ports and in one orientation_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Note. it will only work plugged into one of chromebooks ports and in one orientation_
```

now check if it works

```
ls /dev/ttyU*
```
output
```
ttyUSB0 ttyUSB1 ttyUSB2
```

> _Note. this may not appear on some chromebooks with non chromeos, you can connect the other end diffrent linux pc_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Note. this may not appear on some chromebooks with non chromeos (due to a partially broken usb-stack in mainline linux for them), in such a case you can connect the other end diffrent linux pc_
```

 
_Note. you can connect the device to itself if it has 2 ports_

you can disable hardware writeprotection on any linux/chromeos (as long as device gets detected) with

```
echo "wp false" > /dev/ttyUSB0
echo "wp false atboot" > /dev/ttyUSB0
```

> _Note. on debian devices that detect the ttyUSB0 you can use ```minicom /dev/ttyUSB0``` (```sudo apt install minicom```) to see whats going on behind the sceen and type the samec commands, if it complains about modem being missing just ```ln /dev/ttyUSB0 /dev/modem```_

Reviewer: i always thought that it was minicom -D device - does it work without the "-D" as well?

Author: it does for most devices

on ideapad duet slim 3 it also requires a symlink to work but that might not be related

Reviewer: ok - then lets keep it as you suggested

after doing it enable it back just to be safe

```
echo "wp true" > /dev/ttyUSB0
echo "wp true atboot" > /dev/ttyUSB0
```

> 

Reviewer: maybe a note about enabling testmode (see my arm chromebook repo) might be good as well - i think it is also good to keep the chromebook open in some cases (i do not remember exactly what it was good for right now)?

sources :
- https://www.chromium.org/chromium-os/developer-information-for-chrome-os-devices
- https://wiki.mrchromebox.tech/Firmware_Write_Protect#Disabling_WP_on_CR50_Devices_via_CCD
- https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromiumos/platform/ec/+/cr50_stab/docs/case_closed_debugging_cr50.md
- https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromiumos/docs/+/master/write_protection.md
- https://github.com/jackrosenthal/ec-zephyr-build/blob/master/docs/case_closed_debugging_cr50.md
- https://wiki.mrchromebox.tech/Unbricking
- https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromiumos/platform/ec/+/cr50_stab/docs/case_closed_debugging_cr50.md#Option-2_OpenNoDevMode-and-OpenFromUSB-are-set-to-Always

# Setting gbb flags

> gbb flags make it so if your chromebook battery runs dry, you won't lose access to your system

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gbb flags set some default behaviour for a chromeook which canl result in it not forgetting being in developer mode and being able to boot from usb devices if the battery runs dry (especially for older chromebooks). as a result you won't lose access to your system in such a case
```

in order to set gbb flags you need to [enable developermode](./preparing-chromebook.md) and disable hardware write protection

1. start by booting chrome os and entering tty with ```[ctrl]``` ```[alt]``` ```[->]``` or ```[ctrl]``` ```[alt]``` ```[refresh]``` or ```[ctrl]``` ```[alt]``` ```[f2]```

2. login with username chronos (no password required)

3. move to directory where ```touch testfile``` works (```cd /tmp``` should be ok)

4. check software write protection with ```flashrom --wp-status```

> it will probaly enable, you can disable it with ```flashrom --wp-disable``` and check it again with ```flashrom --wp-status```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it will probaly be enabled, you can disable it with ```flashrom --wp-disable``` and check it again with ```flashrom --wp-status```
```

  GBB_FLAG_LOAD_OPTION_ROMS           0x00000002
  GBB_FLAG_ENABLE_ALTERNATE_OS        0x00000004
  GBB_FLAG_FORCE_DEV_SWITCH_ON        0x00000008
  GBB_FLAG_FORCE_DEV_BOOT_USB         0x00000010
  GBB_FLAG_DISABLE_FW_ROLLBACK_CHECK  0x00000020
  GBB_FLAG_ENTER_TRIGGERS_TONORM      0x00000040
  GBB_FLAG_FORCE_DEV_BOOT_LEGACY      0x00000080
  GBB_FLAG_FAFT_KEY_OVERIDE           0x00000100
  GBB_FLAG_DISABLE_EC_SOFTWARE_SYNC   0x00000200
  GBB_FLAG_DEFAULT_DEV_BOOT_LEGACY    0x00000400
  GBB_FLAG_DISABLE_PD_SOFTWARE_SYNC   0x00000800
  likely more
```
*Note. some values may be not supported by all systems*
</details>

<details>
<summary>it's recommended to use 0x19 for gbb flags</summary>

which combines

- GBB_FLAG_DEV_SCREEN_SHORT_DELAY 0x00000001 - initial boot screen only for 2 seconds instead of the default 30 seconds and no beep afterwards
- GBB_FLAG_FORCE_DEV_SWITCH_ON 0x00000008 - keep developer mode enabled by default
- GBB_FLAG_FORCE_DEV_BOOT_USB 0x00000010 - keep the possibility to boot from usb/sd card enabled by default
</details>

5. set the desired gbb flags via the command ```/usr/share/vboot/bin/set_gbb_flags.sh 0x19```,

> on newer chromeos versions (around 112+ or so) one should use ```futility gbb --set --flash --flags=0x19``` instead (but the old command from above seems to still work as well)

Reviewer: on newest chromeos versions the old command no longer works - will have to fix this in my arm chromebook repo as well
```suggestion
on newer chromeos versions (around 112+ or so) one should use ```futility gbb --set --flash --flags=0x19``` instead
```

6. check current flags via the command ```/usr/share/vboot/bin/get_gbb_flags.sh``` (newer version: ```futility gbb --get --flash --flags```)

7. re-enable the software write protection via ```flashrom --wp-enable```
<details>
<summary>in case you get an error for that command speaking about --wp-range</summary>

- (which seems to happen on newer chromeos versions), then please do the following, [see this](https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromiumos/docs/+/master/write_protection.md#Enabling-write-protect)
  1. run the command ```fmap_decode bios.bin```
  2. note down the range for WP_RO - usually it is 0x00000000 to 0x00200000 (or 0x00400000), but better double check
  3. then rerun the failed command as (with the range noted down above) - for example ```flashrom --wp-enable --wp-range 0x00000000 0x00200000```
</details>

8. re-check the software write protect via ```flashrom --wp-status``` - it should be enabled again now
9. if everything looks good, you can shutdown your system now

> 10. enable hardware write protection with screw or ccd

Reviewer: ```suggestion
10. enable hardware write protection with screw or ccd or just leave it open if that is ok 
```
